This is one of multiple IP addressing and subnetting scenarios rather than just working out the subnets
for a scenario.
We gonna work them out and then configure the devices so that we can practically design and configure
a Cisco IP network.
OK so now that we've worked out the subnets we need to configure the devices in our network.
Let's assume that these switches are Layer 2 switches the local area networks need to support up to
60 hosts including an IP address allocated to the switches and the routers.
So let's start with router 1 on the fastEthernet interface.
I'm gonna no shut the interface.
We need to configure an IP address so 192 168 1 and this is why subnetting is so important.
What address are we gonna allocate to the router?
So the network we're using is 192 186 1.0 slash 26.
So let's assume we want to use the last IP address for the router.
What is the first IP address and last IP address in the subnet?
So there are four addresses that we need to think about, we need to think about the subnet address that's
192 168 1.0 slash 26.
Then we need to work out the first IP address
or first host that can be allocated then we need to work out the last IP address and we need to work
out what the broadcast address is.
So we already have the subnet address, to work out the first IP address what you do is you set all binary
bits to 0 in the host portion except for the last bit.
So if you look at this that equates to 1 in decimal.
So the first host will be 192 168 1.1 slash 26.
There's our subnet.
There's our first host, to work out to the last address in the subnet you fill the host portion only the host
portion with binary ones.
Except for the last bit which is set to binary 0.
So notice the host portion is filled with binary ones except for the last bit.
So what does this equal.
It's 32 plus 16 which is 48 plus 8 which is 56 plus 4 which is 60 plus 2 which is 62.
So that equals 62 slash 26.
And what is the broadcast address equal to.
Now talk about easier ways to work this out but let's work it out as follows.
So to work out the broadcast what you do is you fill the host portion with binary ones and that will
give you 63 slash 26 so you can either count up all these bits or you do it in reverse.
You say it's 255 minus 128 minus 64.
This is why it's good to have this in the exam.
So when you go to the exam write this down so that you can work out the values.
So this address is a broadcast address so we can't allocate that to the router.
But what we can do is allocate the last IP address to the router.
So the routing needs to be configured as 192 168 1 62 and the mask is 255 255 255 192.
Remember the mask is 255 255 255 192, IP address again is 192 168 162 which is what we've configured
on the router.
So I can press enter.
So we've now configured the router and as an example, we should be able to ping ourselves which we
can and if we ping 63 that is actually a broadcast
so show IP interface fast
ethernet 0 slash 0 notice the router is configured as follows IP address is 192 168 162 slash 26.
This is all hosts, all network broadcast but this is a local subnet broadcast.
So again show run interface f0 slash, f0 slash zero, there is our configuration.
Now we need to configure the hosts
and let's assume that we're gonna configure the first host using the first IP address in the subnet.
So it's 192 168 1
so it needs to be configured as 192 168 1.1 slash 26.
So 1.1 subnet mask is 255 255 255 192, default gateway is 62 and I'll set the DNS to the
default gateway, click save let's start-up that host and open up a console to the host.
So here it is.
I have config eth zero, IP address of the host is configured as follows.
Mask is set to the following.
So ping 192 168 1.1 and ping itself can we ping the router.
Yes, we can.
Now, to prove that we could de-bug IP ICMP and ping from the host to the router.
You can see the pings are succeeding and we're getting it debug on the router.
Turn off the Debug.
Ping 192 168 1 21 router and ping the first PC show IP interface brief again.
This is the IP address of the router.
Let's configure the second PC 61
so I'll configure that statically
61 subnet mask is 255 255 255 192, router is 62 we'll set the DNS to the router
and start the PC up and open up a console.
So here's ubuntu 2, PC 2 I-F config ethe zero, IP address is 61 subnet mask is this, Can we ping
the router?
Yes, we can.
Can we ping the other host?
So we've configured the IP addresses on this subnet.
Now one last test.
Let's ping the broadcast address.
Notice the option we are told that we have to explicitly specify broadcast and when I broadcast the
router actually replies to that broadcast the other host doesn't.
But we are pinging the broadcast address when we use 63 so the broadcast isn't 192 168  1 255 the
broadcast address for the subnet is 192 168 1 63.
So we have successfully configured this subnet.
Now we need to configure this subnet and this gets a little bit more interesting because it's 192 1
68 1 64 slash 26
I hope you found this video useful.
If it was of benefit to you please like it and please subscribe to my YouTube channel.
I wish you all the very best.